Bursting onto the Microsoft Flight Simulator scene with the highly regarded Fenix A320ceo, the work that Fenix Simulations is doing with their Airbus A320 project always captures attention. Today is no different as the team provides an update on the roll out of version two of their popular airliner project and announces future release of A319 and A321 companion projects. Fenix Simulations plans to roll out updates to their Airbus A320ceo project in a pair of blocks that will bring new features and bug fixes alike. In Block 1 they have announced plans to release updated code and code optimizations, revamped display technology for more accuracy and performance, and new VNAV programming. These updates will come alongside other bug fixes and a full change log is anticipated for launch.

Block 2 gets even more interesting as it brings with it a new visual model which Fenix report has even higher fidelity than the first one. This will also come with the new IAE engine and external model, more avionics fixes, an updated EFB, and any additional fixes or improvements to content released in Block 1. Block 1 is expected to launch “soon” with Block 2 expected by sometime in September. Fenix appear to have done extensive rebuilding with what is already regarded as an excellent product but this will no doubt put things that much further ahead while addressing some of the issues that the team have had to confront.

A319 and A321 on the way, Sharklets
Fenix Simulations are also planning to release an expansion package to the A320 that will bundle together the A319 and A321. The expansion package is expected to be £39.99 according to the announcement and it doesn’t sound like Fenix, at least at this point, intend to offer them separately. Fenix have also planned to release a version of the A320ceo with Sharklet winglets. These are the tall winglets that are standard on the A320neo variant and have been added to some of the older A320ceo versions as well. Fenix have promised that as a free update to the A320 and now to the other models as well with a release expected in early 2024.

Released alongside World Update 14: Central Europe, Microsoft, Asobo and Aeroplane Heaven came together to offer us the appropriately thematic Czechoslovak built AE-45 and AE-145 general aviation airplane for Microsoft Flight Simulator. Now that it’s out and I’ve had a chance to fly it around a bunch, I wanted to offer up a review. Does this Local Legend appeal to you? I have a look!

A bit of history
Development on the Aero Vodochody AE-45 began in the wake of World War II with designers Jiři Bouzek, Ondřej Němec and František Vik working on the aircraft in their spare time. The project would eventually become a company project and the aircraft first flew on July 21, 1947. Between 1947 and 1961, Aero Vodochody and then Let Kunovice would produce a total of 590 aircraft.
The name, Ae-45, referred to the aircraft’s ability to carry 4-5 people.

A number of variants would be produced with the Ae-45 with a “Super Aero” Ae-45S produced by Let offering better navigational equipment. A larger and partially redesigned Ae-145 would be the last major variant. The initial variant would be powered by Walter Minor 4-III engines propelling it to 230 km/h (or 124 knots) cruise and 265 km/h (143 knots) top speed. The later version, the Ae-145, would be powered by Walter M 332-III boosting speed to 250 km/h (135 knots) cruise and 280 km/h (151 knots) top speed.

The aircraft was remarkable for its time with an all metal design, clean aerodynamics, and good reliability. Pilot Jan Anderle received the Norton-Griffiths Challenge Trophy in the 1949 National Air Race in the United Kingdom. The same pilot would later take part in an adventure flying the aircraft from France to Cameroon with a non-stop flight across the Sahara.

According to the articles that I’ve read, few Ae-45 and Ae-145 are still flying today and so Aeroplane Heaven and Microsoft and Asobo have once again managed to provide us with something that is both representation of history as well as a kind of digital archival piece that helps the airplane live on.

Variants
This is an interesting arrangement in that we have two different versions of the airplane available in the package.

The Ae-45 is the basic and early post-war variant that has less power and less sophisticated avionics. Some of the avionics are going to be very familiar to someone with World War II aviation interests as many of the gauges and some of the controls come straight from German aircraft at the time. The magneto control, for example, is apparently derived from stocks meant for Heinkel He-111 bombers (and the design is familiar to many other German types of the time too).
There’s no autopilot here and only very basic navigational equipment. The view, however, is outstanding and I think this earlier version is more fun to just wing around and fly. It’s certainly a more unique experience.

The Ae-145 is more modern starting production in 1959 and borrows more equipment and gauges from western aircraft of that era. If you’ve been flying around Piper Arrows or Cessna types from the 60s you’ll probably feel a little more comfortable here. An autopilot makes flying the aircraft longer distances easier to do and so if you’re doing cross country tours I think this is the one to fly.

Both aircraft have some unique arrangements in the cockpit. Throttle and mixture controls are typical of most aircraft while the propeller pitch is electronically managed and has a couple of different states like takeoff, climb, and cruise. I do want to note, however, that my propeller pitch axis on my throttle overrides these controls which can make for some odd scenarios if you try and go back and forth.